Qpc-euro.md, before:

---
title: "Qpc-euro.Rmd"
author: "em"
date: "February 13, 2017"
output:
  html_document:
    keep_md: yes
---



This notebook has code for running a form of Q<sub>pc</sub> analysis using the Major-Goodman GWAS panel and detecting selection in the European landraces.

# Load in the kinship matrix and make a conditional matrix 

```r
load('data/euro.282.E.rda')
sigma11 = as.matrix(myF[1:906,1:906])
sigma12 = as.matrix(myF[1:906,907:1168])
sigma21 = as.matrix(myF[907:1168,1:906])
sigma22 = as.matrix(myF[907:1168,907:1168]) #we are dropping the last row
sigma.cond = sigma11 - sigma12 %*% solve(sigma22) %*% sigma21
condEig = eigen(sigma.cond)
cEigVectors = condEig$vectors
cEigValues = condEig$values
#save(cEigVectors, cEigValues, file = 'data/euro.282.condeig.rda')

traitNames = read.table('data/blup.names', stringsAsFactors=F)$V1

niceTraitnames = sapply(traitNames, function(x){
  strsplit(x, '0607')[[1]][1]
})
```

# Calculate cutoffs for PCs

```r
#get cutoffs for pcs based on % variation explained
varexp = cEigValues/sum(cEigValues)
sumexp = sapply(1:length(varexp), function(x){sum(varexp[1:x])})



#get cutoffs for how many pcs to look at
pcmax = which(sumexp > 0.30)[1]
pcmax
```

```
## [1] 17
```

```r
library(nFactors)
```

```
## Loading required package: MASS
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'MASS'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:dplyr':
## 
##     select
```

```
## Loading required package: psych
```

```
## Loading required package: boot
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'boot'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:psych':
## 
##     logit
```

```
## Loading required package: lattice
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'lattice'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:boot':
## 
##     melanoma
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'nFactors'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:lattice':
## 
##     parallel
```

```r
myscree = nScree(cEigValues)
myscree$Components[1]
```

```
##   noc
## 1  56
```

```r
library('AssocTests')
```

```
## Loading required package: cluster
```

```
## Loading required package: mvtnorm
```

```
## Loading required package: combinat
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'combinat'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:utils':
## 
##     combn
```

```
## Loading required package: fExtremes
```

```
## Loading required package: timeDate
```

```
## Loading required package: timeSeries
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'timeSeries'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:psych':
## 
##     outlier
```

```
## Loading required package: fBasics
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'fBasics'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:psych':
## 
##     tr
```

```
## Loading required package: fGarch
```

```r
mytw = tw(cEigValues, eigenL = length(cEigValues))
mytw$SigntEigenL
```

```
## [1] 124
```

```r
plot(cEigValues, bty="n", xlab = "PCs", ylab = "Eigenvalues")
abline(v = pcmax, col = viridis(6)[3], lwd=2)
abline(v = myscree$Components[1], col = viridis(6)[4], lwd=2)
abline(v = mytw$SigntEigenL, col = viridis(6)[5], lwd=2)

legend('topright',c('30% var explained','Castells rule','Tracy Widom'), col = viridis(6)[3:5], lwd=2, bty="n")
```

![](Qpc-euro_files/figure-html/pccutoffs-1.png)<!-- -->

# Run Qpc
The function is in qpctools/R/QpcEuro.R

```bash
cat qpctools/R/QpcEuro.R
```

```
## #' Calculate Qpc on European landraces
## #'
## #' This function calculates Qpc on European landraces.
## #' @param myI the trait number that we're looking at
## #' @param myM the number of lines in the genotyping panel
## #' @param gwasPrefix path prefix for the GWAS results
## #' @param sigPrefix path prefix for the genotypes of GWAS loci in the genotyping panel
## #' @param cutoff p value cutoff for including SNPs. Default is 1.
## #' @param mysigma the kinship matrix for the combined genotyping and GWAS panels.
## #' @param myLambda a list of eigenvalues of the conditional kinship matrix
## #' @param myU a matrix of eigenvectors of the conditional kinship matrix
## #' @export
## 
## 
## Qpceuro <- function(myI, myM = 906, cutoff=1, gwasPrefix = 'data/263-gwas-results/ldfiltered.assoc.', 
##                     sigPrefix = 'data/263-gwas-results/sigSnpsEuro.', mysigma = myF, mypcmax = pcmax,
##                     myLambda = cEigValues, myU = cEigVectors){ 
##   
## #remove the last end of PCs 
## tailCutoff = round(.9*myM)
##   
## #generate sigmas
## sigma22 = as.matrix(mysigma[(myM + 1):dim(mysigma)[1],(myM + 1):dim(mysigma)[1]])
## sigma12 = as.matrix(myF[1:myM,(myM+1):dim(mysigma)[1]])
## 
## 
## #read in data
## gwasHits = read.table(paste(gwasPrefix,myI,sep=""), stringsAsFactors=F)
## names(gwasHits) = c('x','y',strsplit('chr     rs      ps      n_miss  allele1 allele0 af      beta    se      l_remle l_mle   p_wald  p_lrt   p_score scaf', split=' +')[[1]])[1:ncol(gwasHits)]
## gwasHits$locus =  sapply(gwasHits$rs, function(x){paste('s',gsub(":","_",x),sep="")})
## sigGenos = read.table(paste(sigPrefix,myI, sep=""), header=T, stringsAsFactors=F)
## 
## ##filter based on p cutoff
## gwasHits = dplyr::filter(gwasHits, p_lrt < cutoff)
## 
## #combine table of GWAS results with genotypes in the GWAS set
## combInfo = dplyr::inner_join(sigGenos, gwasHits, by = c('locus'))
## combInfo$mybetas = ifelse(combInfo$allele1 == combInfo$ALT, combInfo$beta, -combInfo$beta)
## myBetas = as.matrix(combInfo$mybetas)
## 
## #center genotype matrix
## myG = t(as.matrix(combInfo[,6:1174]))
## #myG = t(as.matrix(sigGenos[,6:ncol(sigGenos)]))
## m = nrow(myG)
## myT = matrix(data = -1/m, nrow = m - 1, ncol = m)
## diag(myT) = (m - 1)/m
## myGcent = myT %*% myG
## 
## #calculate breeding values
## allZ = myGcent %*% myBetas
## z1 = allZ[1:myM]
## z2 = allZ[(myM+1):length(allZ)]
## #z2cent = z2 - mean(z2)
## zcond = mean(allZ) + sigma12 %*% solve(sigma22) %*%  z2 #calculating the conditional prediction for Z
## #zcond = zcond - mean(zcond)#center zcond
## #z1 = z1 - mean(z1)
## 
## #project breeding values onto PCs and standardize
## myBm = t(z1 - zcond) %*% as.matrix(myU) #z1 - zcond is the observed - expected under conditional
## 
## #do PC specific test -- here still using Va from the loci effect sizes and frequency
## myCmprime = sapply(1:(myM-1), function(x){t(myBm[,x]/sqrt(myLambda[x]))})
## myQm = sapply(1:mypcmax, function(n){
##     var0(myCmprime[n])/var0(myCmprime[(tailCutoff-50):tailCutoff])
##   })
## myPsprime = sapply(1:mypcmax, function(x){pf(myQm[x], 1, 50, lower.tail=F)})
## 
## outList = list(muprime = zcond, bv = z1, cmprime = myCmprime, pprime = myPsprime, n.sites = nrow(combInfo))
## return(outList)
## 
## }
```



```r
qpceuroOut = lapply(1:22,Qpceuro)
save(qpceuroOut, file = "data/qpc_euro_output.rda")
```

# Look at results

```r
load('data/qpc_euro_output.rda')

pcpvals = sapply(qpceuroOut, function(x) {x$pprime}) #matrix, rows are pvals, columns are traits
allqvals = get_q_values(pcpvals)

layout(matrix(1, nrow=1, ncol=1))
mysig2 =  cut((1:1000/1000), c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1)) #for legend
par(mar=c(8,14,2,2), xpd=TRUE, mfrow=c(1,1))
mycol = c(viridis(6, direction=1)[1:4], "white")
image(allqvals, col=mycol, xaxt="n", yaxt="n", bty="n", breaks=c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1))
axis(1, at=seq(0,1, length=nrow(pcpvals)), label=1:nrow(pcpvals))
axis(2, at=(0:21)/21, labels = niceTraitnames, las=2)
legend(-0.2,-0.15, c('FDR',levels(mysig2)), fill=c('white',mycol), border=c('white',rep('black',5)), bty="n", horiz=T)
```

![](Qpc-euro_files/figure-html/heatmap-figure-1.png)<!-- -->

```r
image(pcpvals, col=mycol, xaxt="n", yaxt="n", bty="n", breaks=c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1))
axis(1, at=seq(0,1, length=nrow(pcpvals)), label=1:nrow(pcpvals))
axis(2, at=(0:21)/21, labels = niceTraitnames, las=2)
legend(-0.2,-0.15, c('P value',levels(mysig2)), fill=c('white',mycol), border=c('white',rep('black',5)), bty="n", horiz=T)
```

![](Qpc-euro_files/figure-html/heatmap-figure-2.png)<!-- -->


# Running the original version of the test.
The function is in qpctools/R/Qpceuro-nocond.R

```bash
cat qpctools/R/QpcEuro-nocond.R
```

```
## #' Calculate Qpc on European landraces
## #'
## #' This function calculates Qpc on European landraces.
## #' @param myI the trait number that we're looking at
## #' @param myM the number of lines in the genotyping panel
## #' @param gwasPrefix path prefix for the GWAS results
## #' @param sigPrefix path prefix for the genotypes of GWAS loci in the genotyping panel
## #' @param cutoff p value cutoff for including SNPs. Default is 1.
## #' @param mysigma the kinship matrix for the genotyping panel.
## #' @param myLambda a list of eigenvalues of the genotyping panel kinship matrix
## #' @param myU a matrix of eigenvectors of the genotyping panel kinship matrix
## #' @export
## 
## 
## 
## Qpceuro_nocond <- function(myI, myM = 906, gwasPrefix = "data/263-gwas-results/ldfiltered.assoc.", 
##     sigPrefix = "data/263-gwas-results/sigSnpsEuro.", mysigma = euroOnlyF, 
##     mypcmax = pcmax, myU = euroOnlyeigen$vectors, myLambdas = euroOnlyeigen$values)
##   {
##   
## tailCutoff = round(0.9 * myM)
## 
## #read in data
## gwasHits = read.table(paste(gwasPrefix,myI,sep=""), stringsAsFactors=F) #gwas results
## names(gwasHits) = c('x','y',strsplit('chr     rs      ps      n_miss  allele1 allele0 af      beta    se      l_remle l_mle   p_wald  p_lrt   p_score', split=' +')[[1]])
## gwasHits$locus =  sapply(gwasHits$rs, function(x){paste('s',gsub(":","_",x),sep="")})
## sigGenos = read.table(paste(sigPrefix,myI, sep=""), header=T, stringsAsFactors=F) #genotypes of gwas snps in the European landraces
## 
## #combine table of GWAS results with genotypes in the GWAS set
## combInfo = dplyr::left_join(sigGenos, gwasHits, by = 'locus')
## combInfo$mybetas = ifelse(combInfo$allele1 == combInfo$ALT, combInfo$beta, -combInfo$beta)
## myBetas = as.matrix(combInfo$mybetas)
## myG = t(as.matrix(sigGenos[,6:(myM+5)]))
## 
## #center genotype matrix 
## m = nrow(myG)
## myT = matrix(data = -1/m, nrow = m - 1, ncol = m)
## diag(myT) = (m - 1)/m
## myGcent = myT %*% myG
## 
## #calculate breeding values
## allZ = myGcent %*% myBetas
## 
## #project breeding values onto PCs and standardize by eigenvalue
## myBm = t(allZ) %*% myU
## 
## #do Qpc
## myCmprime = sapply(1:(myM-1), function(x){t(myBm[,x]/sqrt(myLambdas[x]))})
## myQm = sapply(1:mypcmax, function(n){
##     var0(myCmprime[n])/var0(myCmprime[(tailCutoff-50):tailCutoff])
##   })
## myPsprime = sapply(1:mypcmax, function(x){pf(myQm[x], 1, 50, lower.tail=F)})
## 
## outList = list(cmprime = myCmprime, pprime = myPsprime, n.sites = nrow(combInfo))
## return(outList)
## 
## }
```



```r
#
load('data/euroOnlyK.rda')

### function for running Qpc on European polygenic scores without the conditional test
ncEuroOut = lapply(1:22,Qpceuro_nocond)
save(ncEuroOut, file="data/qpc-euro-nc.rda")
```


```r
load('data/qpc-euro-nc.rda')

### look at the output
ncpvals = sapply(ncEuroOut, function(x) {x$pprime}) #matrix, rows are pvals, columns are traits
ncqvals = get_q_values(ncpvals)

#mysig = apply(allqvals, 2, function(x){ cut(x, c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1), labels=F)})
mysig2 =  cut((1:1000/1000), c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1)) #for legend
par(mar=c(8,14,2,2), xpd=TRUE, mfrow=c(1,1))
mycol = c(viridis(6, direction=1)[1:4], "white")
image(ncqvals, col=mycol, xaxt="n", yaxt="n", bty="n", breaks=c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1))
axis(1, at=seq(0,1, length=nrow(ncpvals)), label=1:nrow(ncpvals))
axis(2, at=(0:21)/21, labels = niceTraitnames, las=2)
legend(-0.2,-0.15, c('FDR',levels(mysig2)), fill=c('white',mycol), border=c('white',rep('black',5)), bty="n", horiz=T)
```

![](Qpc-euro_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-3-1.png)<!-- -->

```r
image(ncpvals, col=mycol, xaxt="n", yaxt="n", bty="n", breaks=c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1))
axis(1, at=seq(0,1, length=nrow(ncpvals)), label=1:nrow(ncpvals))
axis(2, at=(0:21)/21, labels = niceTraitnames, las=2)
legend(-0.2,-0.15, c('P value',levels(mysig2)), fill=c('white',mycol), border=c('white',rep('black',5)), bty="n", horiz=T)
```

![](Qpc-euro_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-3-2.png)<!-- -->




# Map of the landraces

```r
#lat long plot
library(maps)
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'maps'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:cluster':
## 
##     votes.repub
```

```r
load("data/euro_qpc_data.rda")
eurodat = read.table('data/eurolandraceinfo.csv', sep=',', head=T, stringsAsFactors=F)

map("world", xlim=c(1.5*min(eurodat$Longitude),1.2*max(eurodat$Longitude)), ylim=c(0.85*min(eurodat$Latitude),1.05*max(eurodat$Latitude)), fill=T, col="azure")
points(eurodat$Longitude, eurodat$Latitude, col = magma(6)[4], lwd=4)
```

![](Qpc-euro_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)<!-- -->

Commit message:

moving to 50 percent go into Va

Qpc-euro.md, after:

---
title: "Qpc-euro.Rmd"
author: "em"
date: "February 13, 2017"
output:
  html_document:
    keep_md: yes
---



This notebook has code for running a form of Q<sub>pc</sub> analysis using the Major-Goodman GWAS panel and detecting selection in the European landraces.

# Load in the kinship matrix and make a conditional matrix 

```r
load('data/euro.282.E.rda')
sigma11 = as.matrix(myF[1:906,1:906])
sigma12 = as.matrix(myF[1:906,907:1168])
sigma21 = as.matrix(myF[907:1168,1:906])
sigma22 = as.matrix(myF[907:1168,907:1168]) #we are dropping the last row
sigma.cond = sigma11 - sigma12 %*% solve(sigma22) %*% sigma21
condEig = eigen(sigma.cond)
cEigVectors = condEig$vectors
cEigValues = condEig$values
#save(cEigVectors, cEigValues, file = 'data/euro.282.condeig.rda')

traitNames = read.table('data/blup.names', stringsAsFactors=F)$V1

niceTraitnames = sapply(traitNames, function(x){
  strsplit(x, '0607')[[1]][1]
})
```

# Calculate cutoffs for PCs

```r
#get cutoffs for pcs based on % variation explained
varexp = cEigValues/sum(cEigValues)
sumexp = sapply(1:length(varexp), function(x){sum(varexp[1:x])})



#get cutoffs for how many pcs to look at
pcmax = which(sumexp > 0.30)[1]
pcmax
```

```
## [1] 17
```

```r
library(nFactors)
```

```
## Loading required package: MASS
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'MASS'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:dplyr':
## 
##     select
```

```
## Loading required package: psych
```

```
## Loading required package: boot
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'boot'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:psych':
## 
##     logit
```

```
## Loading required package: lattice
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'lattice'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:boot':
## 
##     melanoma
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'nFactors'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:lattice':
## 
##     parallel
```

```r
myscree = nScree(cEigValues)
myscree$Components[1]
```

```
##   noc
## 1  56
```

```r
library('AssocTests')
```

```
## Loading required package: cluster
```

```
## Loading required package: mvtnorm
```

```
## Loading required package: combinat
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'combinat'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:utils':
## 
##     combn
```

```
## Loading required package: fExtremes
```

```
## Loading required package: timeDate
```

```
## Loading required package: timeSeries
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'timeSeries'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:psych':
## 
##     outlier
```

```
## Loading required package: fBasics
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'fBasics'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:psych':
## 
##     tr
```

```
## Loading required package: fGarch
```

```r
mytw = tw(cEigValues, eigenL = length(cEigValues))
mytw$SigntEigenL
```

```
## [1] 124
```

```r
plot(cEigValues, bty="n", xlab = "PCs", ylab = "Eigenvalues")
abline(v = pcmax, col = viridis(6)[3], lwd=2)
abline(v = myscree$Components[1], col = viridis(6)[4], lwd=2)
abline(v = mytw$SigntEigenL, col = viridis(6)[5], lwd=2)

legend('topright',c('30% var explained','Castells rule','Tracy Widom'), col = viridis(6)[3:5], lwd=2, bty="n")
```

![](Qpc-euro_files/figure-html/pccutoffs-1.png)<!-- -->

# Run Qpc
The function is in qpctools/R/QpcEuro.R

```bash
cat qpctools/R/QpcEuro.R
```

```
## #' Calculate Qpc on European landraces
## #'
## #' This function calculates Qpc on European landraces.
## #' @param myI the trait number that we're looking at
## #' @param myM the number of lines in the genotyping panel
## #' @param gwasPrefix path prefix for the GWAS results
## #' @param sigPrefix path prefix for the genotypes of GWAS loci in the genotyping panel
## #' @param cutoff p value cutoff for including SNPs. Default is 1.
## #' @param mysigma the kinship matrix for the combined genotyping and GWAS panels.
## #' @param myLambda a list of eigenvalues of the conditional kinship matrix
## #' @param myU a matrix of eigenvectors of the conditional kinship matrix
## #' @param tailCutoff is there if you don't want to use the last PCs to estimate Va because of excess noise. The default value is 0.9, which means that you're not using the last 10 percent of your PCs. Set to 1 if you want to use all PCs
## #' @param vapcs is the number of pcs used to estimate Va. Default is 50
## #' @export
## 
## 
## Qpceuro <- function(myI, myM = 906, cutoff=1, 
## 	gwasPrefix = 'data/263-gwas-results/ldfiltered.assoc.', 
##         sigPrefix = 'data/263-gwas-results/sigSnpsEuro.',
## 	mysigma = myF, mypcmax = pcmax, myLambda = cEigValues, 
## 	myU = cEigVectors, tailCutoff=0.9, vapcs=50
## ){ 
##   
## #remove the last end of PCs 
## myTailCutoff = round(tailCutoff*myM) - 1
##   
## #generate sigmas
## sigma22 = as.matrix(mysigma[(myM + 1):dim(mysigma)[1],(myM + 1):dim(mysigma)[1]])
## sigma12 = as.matrix(myF[1:myM,(myM+1):dim(mysigma)[1]])
## 
## 
## #read in data
## gwasHits = read.table(paste(gwasPrefix,myI,sep=""), stringsAsFactors=F)
## names(gwasHits) = c('x','y',strsplit('chr     rs      ps      n_miss  allele1 allele0 af      beta    se      l_remle l_mle   p_wald  p_lrt   p_score scaf', split=' +')[[1]])[1:ncol(gwasHits)]
## gwasHits$locus =  sapply(gwasHits$rs, function(x){paste('s',gsub(":","_",x),sep="")})
## sigGenos = read.table(paste(sigPrefix,myI, sep=""), header=T, stringsAsFactors=F)
## 
## ##filter based on p cutoff
## gwasHits = dplyr::filter(gwasHits, p_lrt < cutoff)
## 
## #combine table of GWAS results with genotypes in the GWAS set
## combInfo = dplyr::inner_join(sigGenos, gwasHits, by = c('locus'))
## combInfo$mybetas = ifelse(combInfo$allele1 == combInfo$ALT, combInfo$beta, -combInfo$beta)
## myBetas = as.matrix(combInfo$mybetas)
## 
## #center genotype matrix
## myG = t(as.matrix(combInfo[,6:1174]))
## #myG = t(as.matrix(sigGenos[,6:ncol(sigGenos)]))
## m = nrow(myG)
## myT = matrix(data = -1/m, nrow = m - 1, ncol = m)
## diag(myT) = (m - 1)/m
## myGcent = myT %*% myG
## 
## #calculate breeding values
## allZ = myGcent %*% myBetas
## z1 = allZ[1:myM]
## z2 = allZ[(myM+1):length(allZ)]
## #z2cent = z2 - mean(z2)
## zcond = mean(allZ) + sigma12 %*% solve(sigma22) %*%  z2 #calculating the conditional prediction for Z
## #zcond = zcond - mean(zcond)#center zcond
## #z1 = z1 - mean(z1)
## 
## #project breeding values onto PCs and standardize
## myBm = t(z1 - zcond) %*% as.matrix(myU) #z1 - zcond is the observed - expected under conditional
## 
## #do PC specific test -- here still using Va from the loci effect sizes and frequency
## myCmprime = sapply(1:(myM-1), function(x){t(myBm[,x]/sqrt(myLambda[x]))})
## myQm = sapply(1:mypcmax, function(n){
##     var0(myCmprime[n])/var0(myCmprime[(myTailCutoff-vapcs):myTailCutoff])
##   })
## myPsprime = sapply(1:mypcmax, function(x){pf(myQm[x], 1, vapcs, lower.tail=F)})
## 
## outList = list(muprime = zcond, bv = z1, cmprime = myCmprime, pprime = myPsprime, n.sites = nrow(combInfo))
## return(outList)
## 
## }
```



```r
qpceuroOut = lapply(1:22,function(x){Qpceuro(myI = x, vapcs = 906/2, tailCutoff = 1)})
save(qpceuroOut, file = "data/qpc_euro_output.rda")
```

# Look at results

```r
load('data/qpc_euro_output.rda')

pcpvals = sapply(qpceuroOut, function(x) {x$pprime}) #matrix, rows are pvals, columns are traits
allqvals = get_q_values(pcpvals)

layout(matrix(1, nrow=1, ncol=1))
mysig2 =  cut((1:1000/1000), c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1)) #for legend
par(mar=c(8,14,2,2), xpd=TRUE, mfrow=c(1,1))
mycol = c(viridis(6, direction=1)[1:4], "white")
image(allqvals, col=mycol, xaxt="n", yaxt="n", bty="n", breaks=c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1))
axis(1, at=seq(0,1, length=nrow(pcpvals)), label=1:nrow(pcpvals))
axis(2, at=(0:21)/21, labels = niceTraitnames, las=2)
legend(-0.2,-0.15, c('FDR',levels(mysig2)), fill=c('white',mycol), border=c('white',rep('black',5)), bty="n", horiz=T)
```

![](Qpc-euro_files/figure-html/heatmap-figure-1.png)<!-- -->

```r
image(pcpvals, col=mycol, xaxt="n", yaxt="n", bty="n", breaks=c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1))
axis(1, at=seq(0,1, length=nrow(pcpvals)), label=1:nrow(pcpvals))
axis(2, at=(0:21)/21, labels = niceTraitnames, las=2)
legend(-0.2,-0.15, c('P value',levels(mysig2)), fill=c('white',mycol), border=c('white',rep('black',5)), bty="n", horiz=T)
```

![](Qpc-euro_files/figure-html/heatmap-figure-2.png)<!-- -->


# Running the original version of the test.
The function is in qpctools/R/Qpceuro-nocond.R

```bash
cat qpctools/R/QpcEuro-nocond.R
```

```
## #' Calculate Qpc on European landraces
## #'
## #' This function calculates Qpc on European landraces.
## #' @param myI the trait number that we're looking at
## #' @param myM the number of lines in the genotyping panel
## #' @param gwasPrefix path prefix for the GWAS results
## #' @param sigPrefix path prefix for the genotypes of GWAS loci in the genotyping panel
## #' @param cutoff p value cutoff for including SNPs. Default is 1.
## #' @param mysigma the kinship matrix for the genotyping panel.
## #' @param myLambda a list of eigenvalues of the genotyping panel kinship matrix
## #' @param myU a matrix of eigenvectors of the genotyping panel kinship matrix
## #' @param tailCutoff is there if you don't want to use the last PCs to estimate Va because of excess noise. The default value is 0.9, which means that you're not using the last 10 percent of your PCs. Set to 1 if you want to use all PCs
## #' @param vapcs is the number of pcs used to estimate Va. Default is 50
## #' @export
## 
## 
## 
## Qpceuro_nocond <- function(myI, myM = 906, gwasPrefix = "data/263-gwas-results/ldfiltered.assoc.", 
##     sigPrefix = "data/263-gwas-results/sigSnpsEuro.", mysigma = euroOnlyF, 
##     mypcmax = pcmax, myU = euroOnlyeigen$vectors, myLambdas = euroOnlyeigen$values,
##     tailCutoff=0.9, vapcs = 50
## 
## )
##   {
##   
## myTailCutoff = round(tailCutoff * myM) - 1
## 
## #read in data
## gwasHits = read.table(paste(gwasPrefix,myI,sep=""), stringsAsFactors=F) #gwas results
## names(gwasHits) = c('x','y',strsplit('chr     rs      ps      n_miss  allele1 allele0 af      beta    se      l_remle l_mle   p_wald  p_lrt   p_score', split=' +')[[1]])
## gwasHits$locus =  sapply(gwasHits$rs, function(x){paste('s',gsub(":","_",x),sep="")})
## sigGenos = read.table(paste(sigPrefix,myI, sep=""), header=T, stringsAsFactors=F) #genotypes of gwas snps in the European landraces
## 
## #combine table of GWAS results with genotypes in the GWAS set
## combInfo = dplyr::left_join(sigGenos, gwasHits, by = 'locus')
## combInfo$mybetas = ifelse(combInfo$allele1 == combInfo$ALT, combInfo$beta, -combInfo$beta)
## myBetas = as.matrix(combInfo$mybetas)
## myG = t(as.matrix(sigGenos[,6:(myM+5)]))
## 
## #center genotype matrix 
## m = nrow(myG)
## myT = matrix(data = -1/m, nrow = m - 1, ncol = m)
## diag(myT) = (m - 1)/m
## myGcent = myT %*% myG
## 
## #calculate breeding values
## allZ = myGcent %*% myBetas
## 
## #project breeding values onto PCs and standardize by eigenvalue
## myBm = t(allZ) %*% myU
## 
## #do Qpc
## myCmprime = sapply(1:(myM-1), function(x){t(myBm[,x]/sqrt(myLambdas[x]))})
## myQm = sapply(1:mypcmax, function(n){
##     var0(myCmprime[n])/var0(myCmprime[(myTailCutoff-vapcs):myTailCutoff])
##   })
## myPsprime = sapply(1:mypcmax, function(x){pf(myQm[x], 1, vapcs, lower.tail=F)})
## 
## outList = list(cmprime = myCmprime, pprime = myPsprime, n.sites = nrow(combInfo))
## return(outList)
## 
## }
```



```r
#
load('data/euroOnlyK.rda')

### function for running Qpc on European polygenic scores without the conditional test
ncEuroOut = lapply(1:22,function(x){Qpceuro_nocond(myI = x, vapcs = 906/2, tailCutoff = 1)})
save(ncEuroOut, file="data/qpc-euro-nc.rda")
```


```r
load('data/qpc-euro-nc.rda')

### look at the output
ncpvals = sapply(ncEuroOut, function(x) {x$pprime}) #matrix, rows are pvals, columns are traits
ncqvals = get_q_values(ncpvals)

#mysig = apply(allqvals, 2, function(x){ cut(x, c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1), labels=F)})
mysig2 =  cut((1:1000/1000), c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1)) #for legend
par(mar=c(8,14,2,2), xpd=TRUE, mfrow=c(1,1))
mycol = c(viridis(6, direction=1)[1:4], "white")
image(ncqvals, col=mycol, xaxt="n", yaxt="n", bty="n", breaks=c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1))
axis(1, at=seq(0,1, length=nrow(ncpvals)), label=1:nrow(ncpvals))
axis(2, at=(0:21)/21, labels = niceTraitnames, las=2)
legend(-0.2,-0.15, c('FDR',levels(mysig2)), fill=c('white',mycol), border=c('white',rep('black',5)), bty="n", horiz=T)
```

![](Qpc-euro_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-3-1.png)<!-- -->

```r
image(ncpvals, col=mycol, xaxt="n", yaxt="n", bty="n", breaks=c(0,0.001,0.01,0.05,0.1,1))
axis(1, at=seq(0,1, length=nrow(ncpvals)), label=1:nrow(ncpvals))
axis(2, at=(0:21)/21, labels = niceTraitnames, las=2)
legend(-0.2,-0.15, c('P value',levels(mysig2)), fill=c('white',mycol), border=c('white',rep('black',5)), bty="n", horiz=T)
```

![](Qpc-euro_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-3-2.png)<!-- -->




# Map of the landraces

```r
#lat long plot
library(maps)
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'maps'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:cluster':
## 
##     votes.repub
```

```r
load("data/euro_qpc_data.rda")
eurodat = read.table('data/eurolandraceinfo.csv', sep=',', head=T, stringsAsFactors=F)

map("world", xlim=c(1.5*min(eurodat$Longitude),1.2*max(eurodat$Longitude)), ylim=c(0.85*min(eurodat$Latitude),1.05*max(eurodat$Latitude)), fill=T, col="azure")
points(eurodat$Longitude, eurodat$Latitude, col = magma(6)[4], lwd=4)
```

![](Qpc-euro_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)<!-- -->
